doc/opal-api/opal-flash-110-111-112.rst, before:

OPAL Flash calls
================

There are three OPAL calls for interacting with flash devices: ::

 #define OPAL_FLASH_READ	110
 #define OPAL_FLASH_WRITE	111
 #define OPAL_FLASH_ERASE	112

Multiple flash devices are supported by OPAL - each of these calls takes an id
parameter, which much match an ID found in the corresponding ``ibm,opal/flash@n``
device tree node. See :ref:`device-tree/ibm,opal/flash` for details of
the device tree bindings.

All operations on the flash device must be aligned to the block size of the
flash. This applies to both offset and size arguments.

This interface is asynchronous; all calls require a 'token' argument. On
success, the calls will return ``OPAL_ASYNC_COMPLETION``, and an
opal_async_completion message will be sent (with the appropriate token
argument) when the operation completes.

All calls share the same return values:

``OPAL_ASYNC_COMPLETION``
  operation started, an async completion will be triggered with the ``token`` argument

``OPAL_PARAMETER``
  invalid flash id

``OPAL_PARAMETER``
  invalid size or offset (alignment, or access beyond end of device)

``OPAL_BUSY``
  flash in use

``OPAL_HARDWARE``
  error accessing flash device

OPAL_FLASH_READ
---------------

Parameters: ::

	uint64_t id
	uint64_t offset
	uint64_t buffer
	uint64_t size
	uint64_t token

Reads from the specified flash id, at the specified offset, into the buffer.
Will trigger an async completion with token when completed.

OPAL_FLASH_ERASE
----------------

Parameters: ::

	uint64_t id
	uint64_t offset
	uint64_t size
	uint64_t token

Erases the specified flash id, at the specified offset and size.  Will trigger
an async completion with token when completed.

OPAL_FLASH_WRITE
----------------

Parameters: ::

	uint64_t id
	uint64_t offset
	uint64_t buffer
	uint64_t size
	uint64_t token

Writes buffer to the specified flash id, at the specified offset and size. The
flash must be erased before being written. Will trigger an async completion with
token when completed.

Commit message:

core/flash: Make opal_flash_op() actually asynchronous
This patch provides a simple (although not particularly efficient)
asynchronous capability to the opal_flash interface. The advantage of
this approach is that it doesn't require any changing of blocklevel or
its backends to provide an asynchronous implementation. This is also the
disadvantage of this implementation as all it actually does is break the
work up in chunks that it can performed quickly, but still
synchronously. Only a backend could provide a more asynchronous
implementation.

This solves a problem we have right now with the opal_flash_erase call
where it can block in Skiboot for around three minutes. This causes a
variety of problems in Linux due to a processor being gone for a long
time.
For example:

[   98.610043] INFO: rcu_sched detected stalls on CPUs/tasks:
[   98.610050]         113-...: (1 GPs behind) idle=96f/140000000000000/0 softirq=527/528 fqs=1044
[   98.610051]         (detected by 112, t=2102 jiffies, g=223, c=222, q=123)
[   98.610060] Task dump for CPU 113:
[   98.610062] pflash          R  running task        0  3335   3333 0x00040004
[   98.610066] Call Trace:
[   98.610070] [c000001fdd847730] [0000000000000001] 0x1 (unreliable)
[   98.610076] [c000001fdd847900] [c000000000013854] __switch_to+0x1e8/0x1f4
[   98.610081] [c000001fdd847960] [c0000000006122c4] __schedule+0x32c/0x874
[   98.610083] [c000001fdd847a30] [c000001fdd847b40] 0xc000001fdd847b40

It is for this reason that breaking the work up in smaller chunks solves
this problem as Skiboot can return the CPU to Linux between chunks to
avoid Linux getting upset.

Reported-By: Samuel Mendoza-Jonas <sam@mendozajonas.com>

doc/opal-api/opal-flash-110-111-112.rst, after:

OPAL Flash calls
================

There are three OPAL calls for interacting with flash devices: ::

 #define OPAL_FLASH_READ	110
 #define OPAL_FLASH_WRITE	111
 #define OPAL_FLASH_ERASE	112

Multiple flash devices are supported by OPAL - each of these calls takes an id
parameter, which much match an ID found in the corresponding ``ibm,opal/flash@n``
device tree node. See :ref:`device-tree/ibm,opal/flash` for details of
the device tree bindings.

All operations on the flash device must be aligned to the block size of the
flash. This applies to both offset and size arguments.

This interface is asynchronous; all calls require a 'token' argument. On
success, the calls will return ``OPAL_ASYNC_COMPLETION``, and an
opal_async_completion message will be sent (with the appropriate token
argument) when the operation completes.

Due to an error in the powernv_flash driver in Linux these three OPAL
calls should never return ``OPAL_SUCCESS`` as the driver is likely to
treat this return value as an error.

All calls share the same return values:

``OPAL_ASYNC_COMPLETION``
  operation started, an async completion will be triggered with the ``token`` argument

``OPAL_PARAMETER``
  invalid flash id

``OPAL_PARAMETER``
  invalid size or offset (alignment, or access beyond end of device)

``OPAL_BUSY``
  flash in use

``OPAL_HARDWARE``
  error accessing flash device

OPAL_FLASH_READ
---------------

Parameters: ::

	uint64_t id
	uint64_t offset
	uint64_t buffer
	uint64_t size
	uint64_t token

Reads from the specified flash id, at the specified offset, into the buffer.
Will trigger an async completion with token when completed.

OPAL_FLASH_ERASE
----------------

Parameters: ::

	uint64_t id
	uint64_t offset
	uint64_t size
	uint64_t token

Erases the specified flash id, at the specified offset and size.  Will trigger
an async completion with token when completed.

OPAL_FLASH_WRITE
----------------

Parameters: ::

	uint64_t id
	uint64_t offset
	uint64_t buffer
	uint64_t size
	uint64_t token

Writes buffer to the specified flash id, at the specified offset and size. The
flash must be erased before being written. Will trigger an async completion with
token when completed.
